===============
 API Reference
===============


(Note: This document is far from complete and is regularly updated and
reorganized.  This notice will be removed when the document has
matured and stabilized.)

Document Status: draft, in development

.. sectnum::

.. contents::


.. Doctest setup

   >>> import os
   >>> from schevo.test import CreatesSchema
   >>> tester = CreatesSchema()
   >>> db = None
   >>> def new_db(schema_source):
   ...     global db
   ...     if db is not None:
   ...         tester.tearDown()
   ...     tester.schema = schema_source
   ...     tester.setUp()
   ...     db = tester.db


Overview
========

A Schevo database is the combination of a schema definition, stored
data, and an engine that exposes the two.  This document describes in
detail the public API exposed by the Schevo engine.

Schema definitions are pure-Python modules that make use of Schevo's
syntax extensions.  Schema definitions can be directly imported
anywhere, but typically the import process is managed by the Schevo
database engine in order to tie a schema to an open database.

Stored data is managed by the `schevo.store` package, based on Durus_.
The data is kept in a general structure used by all Schevo databases,
described in the `internal database structures`_ reference.

The database engine is defined in the `schevo.database` module, and
provides read/write access to stored data using the higher-level
structures defined by the database's schema definition.

.. _Durus: http://www.mems-exchange.org/software/durus/

.. _internal database structures: reference-database.html


sys Namespaces
==============

``sys`` (short for *system*) is a namespace that contains the public
methods and properties of a Schevo object that are not fields, query
methods, transaction methods, or view methods.  These are kept in a
separate namespace in order to reduce the amount of reserved words.

``sys`` namespaces are accessed by getting the ``sys`` attribute from
a Schevo object.

The following types of Schevo objects have a ``sys`` namespace:

* `Entity instances`_

* Find query instances

* Param query instances

* Transaction instances

* View instances


Database instances
==================


Extent instances
================


Entity instances
================


Entity sys namespace
--------------------


links: Return entities that link to this entity
...............................................

Use ``links`` to find other entities that point to the calling entity.

To find all entities that link to the calling entity, use the form
``links()``.  The return value will be a dictionary of keys in the
form ``(other_extent_name, other_field_name)``, each mapping to a list
of Entity instances in that extent where that field's value is the
calling entity::

  # Doctest to go here.

To find all entities in a specific extent that link to the calling
entity, use the form ``links(other_extent_name)``.  The return value
will be the same as that returned by a call to ``links()``::

  # Doctest to go here.

To find all the entities in a specific extent where a specific field
value links to the calling entity, use the form
``links(other_extent_name, other_field_name)``.  The return value will
be a list of Entity instances in that extent where that field's value
is the calling entity::

  # Doctest to go here.


Field classes
=============


Field instances
===============


Query methods and objects
=========================

At their highest level, `schevo.query.Query` objects use criteria you
specify to create sequences of results.

There are several types of queries, and some queries' criteria consist
of subqueries, from which it obtains results during its execution.

For the purposes of example, let us assume that we are working with
the following schema for this section::

  >>> new_db("""
  ... from schevo.schema import *
  ... schevo.schema.prep(locals())
  ...
  ... class Person(E.Entity):
  ... 
  ...     name = f.unicode()
  ...     birthdate = f.date()
  ... 
  ...     _key(name)
  ...
  ...     _plural = u'People'
  ...
  ...     def __unicode__(self):
  ...         return u'%s, born on %s' % (self.name, self.birthdate)      
  ...
  ...     _sample = [
  ...         ('Robert Jones', '1965-02-03'),
  ...         ('Roberto Gonzales', '1976-04-05'),
  ...         ('Roberta Smith', '1987-06-07'),
  ...         ('Rance Thomas', '1954-12-01'),
  ...         ]
  ...     
  ... class Location(E.Entity):
  ... 
  ...     name = f.unicode()
  ...     
  ...     _key(name)
  ... 
  ...     _sample = [
  ...         ('Bank',),
  ...         ('Grocery Store',),
  ...         ('Library',),
  ...         ]
  ...
  ... class Sighting(E.Entity):
  ... 
  ...     person = f.entity('Person')
  ...     location = f.entity('Location')
  ...     when = f.date()
  ...     
  ...     def __unicode__(self):
  ...         return u'%s at %s on %s' % (
  ...             self.person.name,
  ...             self.location,
  ...             self.when,
  ...             )
  ...
  ...     _sample = [
  ...         (('Robert Jones',), ('Library',), '2004-01-01'),
  ...         (('Roberto Gonzales',), ('Library',), '2004-01-04'),
  ...         (('Robert Jones',), ('Grocery Store',), '2004-01-02'),
  ...         (('Roberto Gonzales',), ('Bank',), '2004-01-05'),
  ...         (('Robert Jones',), ('Bank',), '2004-01-03'),
  ...         (('Roberto Gonzales',), ('Grocery Store',), '2004-01-06'),
  ...         (('Roberta Smith',), ('Grocery Store',), '2004-01-07'),
  ...         (('Rance Thomas',), ('Grocery Store',), '2004-01-08'),
  ...         ]
  ... """)

Both schema modules and database engines expose all available Query
classes in its ``Q`` namespace.  For brevity, we will use an alias::

  >>> Q = db.Q


Match queries
-------------

The simplest query is a match on a field.  Use the
``schevo.query.Match`` class::

  >>> person_name = Q.Match(db.Person, 'name', 'startswith')

To set the value of the match query, set the query's value::

  >>> person_name.value = u'Robert'

If you already have a search in mind, you can specify it in the query
constructor::

  >>> person_name = Q.Match(db.Person, 'name', 'startswith', u'Robert')

It is worth noting that at any point, you can get a human language
version of the query by converting it to a string or unicode::

  >>> print person_name
  People where Name starts with Robert


Retrieving results
------------------

To retrieve the results of a query, call the Query instance to get an
iterator over the results.  For example, if we are using the
``person_name`` query defined above::

  >>> results = person_name()
  >>> for person in results:
  ...     print person
  Robert Jones, born on 1965-02-03
  Roberto Gonzales, born on 1976-04-05
  Roberta Smith, born on 1987-06-07

Query results, at the minimum, must support iteration::

  >>> results = person_name()
  >>> i = iter(results)
  >>> i #doctest: +ELLIPSIS
  <generator object at ...>

To cache the query results, use whatever tools you like.  For example,
you can get a list of results in order to retrieve the length or
perform slices::

  >>> results = list(person_name())
  >>> len(results)
  3
  >>> r0 = results[0]
  >>> r0
  <Person entity oid:1 rev:0>
  >>> results[1:3]
  [<Person entity oid:2 rev:0>, <Person entity oid:3 rev:0>]
  >>> results.index(r0)
  0


Compound queries
----------------

Continuing the example, let us also search for persons who have a
birthdate before 1980-01-01, and who were most recently sighted at the
grocery store.

Create the birthdate query::

  >>> person_birthdate = Q.Match(db.Person, 'birthdate', '<', '1980-01-01')
  >>> print person_birthdate
  People where Birthdate < 1980-01-01
  >>> for person in sorted(person_birthdate()): #doctest: +NORMALIZE_WHITESPACE
  ...     print person
  Robert Jones, born on 1965-02-03
  Roberto Gonzales, born on 1976-04-05
  Rance Thomas, born on 1954-12-01  

Combine the results of these queries using an intersection, so that
we get the Person entities that match both queries::

  >>> persons = Q.Intersection(person_name, person_birthdate)
  >>> print persons #doctest: +NORMALIZE_WHITESPACE
  the intersection of (People where Name starts with Robert,
  People where Birthdate < 1980-01-01)
  >>> for person in sorted(persons()): #doctest: +NORMALIZE_WHITESPACE
  ...     print person
  Robert Jones, born on 1965-02-03
  Roberto Gonzales, born on 1976-04-05

Get all the sightings for each person::

  >>> person_sightings = Q.Match(db.Sighting, 'person', 'in', persons)
  >>> print person_sightings #doctest: +NORMALIZE_WHITESPACE
  Sightings where Person in the intersection of (People where Name
  starts with Robert, People where Birthdate < 1980-01-01)
  >>> for sighting in sorted(person_sightings()):
  ...     print sighting #doctest: +NORMALIZE_WHITESPACE
  Robert Jones at Library on 2004-01-01
  Roberto Gonzales at Library on 2004-01-04
  Robert Jones at Grocery Store on 2004-01-02
  Roberto Gonzales at Bank on 2004-01-05
  Robert Jones at Bank on 2004-01-03
  Roberto Gonzales at Grocery Store on 2004-01-06

Group the sightings by person.  Since we are grouping the results of a
query, which may be heterogeneous, we also specify a field class::

  >>> by_person = Q.Group(person_sightings, 'person', db.Sighting.f.person)
  >>> print by_person #doctest: +NORMALIZE_WHITESPACE
  Sightings where Person in the intersection of (People where Name
  starts with Robert, People where Birthdate < 1980-01-01), grouped
  by Person
  >>> for group in sorted(by_person()): #doctest: +NORMALIZE_WHITESPACE
  ...     print '----' 
  ...     for result in group:
  ...         print result
  ----
  Robert Jones at Library on 2004-01-01
  Robert Jones at Grocery Store on 2004-01-02
  Robert Jones at Bank on 2004-01-03
  ----
  Roberto Gonzales at Library on 2004-01-04
  Roberto Gonzales at Bank on 2004-01-05
  Roberto Gonzales at Grocery Store on 2004-01-06

The results of a Group query is a list of results.  Reduce each group
to the result that has the maximum value for the ``when`` field.
Again, we specify a field class since the query source may be
heterogeneous::

  >>> most_recent = Q.Max(by_person, 'when', db.Sighting.f.when)
  >>> print most_recent #doctest: +NORMALIZE_WHITESPACE
  results that have the maximum When in each (Sightings where Person
  in the intersection of (People where Name starts with Robert, People
  where Birthdate < 1980-01-01), grouped by Person)
  >>> for sighting in sorted(most_recent()): #doctest: +NORMALIZE_WHITESPACE
  ...     print sighting
  Robert Jones at Bank on 2004-01-03
  Roberto Gonzales at Grocery Store on 2004-01-06

Finally, filter ``most_recent`` by the grocery store Location::

  >>> grocery_store = db.Location.findone(name=u'Grocery Store')
  >>> last_seen_shopping = Q.Match(
  ...     most_recent, 'location', '==', grocery_store, db.Sighting.f.location)
  >>> print last_seen_shopping #doctest: +NORMALIZE_WHITESPACE
  results that have the maximum When in each (Sightings where Person
  in the intersection of (People where Name starts with Robert, People
  where Birthdate < 1980-01-01), grouped by Person) where Location ==
  Grocery Store
  >>> for sighting in sorted(last_seen_shopping()):
  ...     print sighting #doctest: +NORMALIZE_WHITESPACE
  Roberto Gonzales at Grocery Store on 2004-01-06
  

Default queries
---------------

The default query for an extent is an Intersection of Match queries
against all non-calculated fields of an extent, with a default
operator of ``any`` (which means "is any value"), and a default value
of ``UNASSIGNED`` (which is ignored when using the ``any`` operator).

This query is the same as would be returned when calling
``db.Sighting.q.default()``::

  >>> query = Q.Intersection(
  ...     Q.Match(db.Sighting, 'person', 'any'),
  ...     Q.Match(db.Sighting, 'location', 'any'),
  ...     Q.Match(db.Sighting, 'when', 'any'),
  ...     )
  >>> print query
  all Sightings

Without changing any of the operators, iterating over the results of
the default query for an extent yields the same thing as iterating
over the extent itself.

The Intersection query optimizes its execution plan to use the
extent's ``find`` method when all of the ``Match`` queries match on
the same extent, when there is only one of any given field name, when
the only operators used are either ``any`` or ``==``, and when all
values are not queries.

As seen above, it also optimizes its label for brevity if all values
have the ``any`` operator.


.. _field container:

Field Containers
================

The following types of objects are field containers:

* `Entity instances`_

* Param query instances

* Transaction instances

* View instances

A field container ``obj`` implements the following:

* They have a namespace, ``obj.f``, that contains field objects.

  - The value of ``obj.f.field_name`` is a `Field instance` associated
    with ``obj``, with the name ``field_name``.

  - The value of ``obj.f['field_name']`` is the same as
    ``obj.f.field_name``.

  - Iterating over ``obj.f`` yields the names of the fields, in the
    order they were defined.

  - If allowed by the field container, you can remove a field named
    ``field_name`` from ``obj`` using the following::

      del obj.f.field_name

  - If allowed by the field container, you can add a new field named
    ``field_name`` and of type ``FieldClass`` to ``obj`` using either
    of the following::

      obj.f.field_name = existing_field_instance
      obj.f.field_name = f.field_class(...)

    The field is added to the end of the definition order.  To
    re-order fields, you can get them from ``obj.f``, delete them from
    ``obj.f``, then reassign them to ``obj.f``, as in this example::

      # Assume original declaration order was:
      #    foo = f.unicode()
      #    bar = f.unicode()
      #    baz = f.unicode()

      bar, baz = obj.f.bar, obj.f.baz
      del obj.f.bar, obj.f.baz
      obj.f.baz = baz
      obj.f.bar = bar

      # Now the order is the following:
      #    foo = f.unicode()
      #    baz = f.unicode()
      #    bar = f.unicode()

* They have a method, ``obj.sys.fields()``, that returns a
  `schevo.fieldspec.FieldMap` ordered dictionary for the fields in
  ``obj``.

  - Certain types of field decorators accept additional arguments to
    the call to ``obj.sys.fields()``.


Iterators
=========

Many objects in a Schevo database provide iterators.


Extents
-------

Iterating over an extent results in a sequence of all entities in the
extent, ordered by OID.


Query, view, and transaction namespaces
---------------------------------------

Iterating over a ``f``, ``q``, ``t``, or ``v`` namespace results in a
sequence of the names in that namespace, in no defined order.

Example::

  >>> tuple(sorted(db.Person.q))
  ('default',)
  >>> tuple(sorted(db.Person[1].t))
  ('delete', 'update')


Entity sys namespaces
---------------------

Iterating over an entity's ``sys`` namespace has no defined result.
It may become part of the `Objects without iterators`_.


Objects without iterators
-------------------------

- Database instances.

- Entity instances.

- Query instances.

- Transaction instances.

- View instances.

- ``sys`` namespaces.


Icon plugin
===========

